A Prayer to the King and Twenty-Five Disciples
by Tashi Tobgyal

Guru padma siddhi hūṃ hrīḥ
A Stream of Blessing: Verses of Supplication to the Accomplished Holders of Mantra who Gained
Realization in this Snowy Land of Tibet1
Homage to the glorious Samantabhadra!
dzam ling dakpé shying kham drak mar
You abide in the cave of glorious Samyé Chimpu
pal gyi samyé chimpü gé gong
At Drakmar, pure land of this world.
dorje lobpön guru pemar
To you, Vajra Master Guru Padma,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

gang kur dzari lé né nyerwa
When your body was residing there
hung shyé sung dré gyen du dok ching
With your speech, uttering Hūṃ, you averted an avalanche
gyur mé tuk kyi yiger chin lap
And blessed the site with this syllable2 of your unchanging mind3
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

nub kyi rik trung gelong chenpo
Great monk born into the Nub clan,
lhodrak kharchur yangdak drup nyé
At Lhodrak Kharchu, you accomplished Śrī Heruka, enlightened mind.
nyi zer la chib namkhé nyingpor
To you, Namkhé Nyingpo, who rides the rays of the sun,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

nub yul rong jön sangyé yeshé
Coming from the valleys in the land of Nub, Sangye Yeshe,
drak kyi yang dzok shinjé shé drup
At Drak Yangdzok you accomplished Yamāntaka, slayer of the Lord of Death.
tu tob drak la purpa dep der
To you, who pierces solid rocks with a kīla,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

u ru ngen lam rik trung bhikshu
Bhikṣu born into the Nyenlam clan in Uru,
wentsar pema wang chen drup nyé
At Wentsa, you accomplished Hayagrīva, Mighty Lotus.
ta ké tsuk tön gyal chok yang der
To you, Gyal Chok Yang, who neighs from the crown of his head,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

drakdar nüden kharchen gyü trung
Born amid wondrous signs into the Kharchen clan in Dragda,
mönkha nering trinlé pur drup
At Mönkha Nering, you accomplished Kīlaya, enlightened activity.
tsogyal sépé mi ro long der
To you, Tsogyal, who revives the dead,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

yartö shampo gang kyi rawar
At the mountain range of Yartö Shampo
sipa dé dro ngönpar drup dzé
You accomplished the higher states of cyclic existence.
mamo ngön khöl drokmi pal yer
To you, Drogmi Palye, who makes mamos his servants,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

patro taktsang samdrup keu tsang
At Patro Taksang in the cave called “Fulfillment of Wishes”
drekpé dakpo ngönpar drup dzé
You accomplished Drekpa Dakpo,4 lord over the arrogant ones.
lhasin dren khöl palgyi senger
To you, Palgyi Senge, who enslaves gods and demons,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

yama lung dang liyül changrar
At Yamalung and Liyul Changra
topden nakpo ngönpar drup dzé
You accomplished Tobden Nakpo,5 'Black Powerful One'.
yeshé chenden bairo tsanar
To you, Vairocana, with your wisdom eye,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

rim sum palgyi samyé u tser
In the centre of the three-storey temple of glorious Samye
dorje gyaltsap chemchok ngöndrup
You accomplished Mahottara,6 Vajra master of the assembly.
ting dzin miyo ngadak gyalpor
To you, King Trisong Detsen, with your unwavering samādhi,
solwa depso chin gyi lop shik
We pray: please grant your blessings!

yudra nyingpo tokpa chok den
Yudra Nyingpo, with supreme accomplishment,
dzutrul nga nyé jnana kuma
Jñānakumāra, with magical powers,
dorje düdjom lung tar tok mé
Dorje Düdjom, unhindered like the wind,
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

khachö né drö yeshé yang dang
Yeshe Yang, who travels to celestial realms,
lha pal chen zen nyawa né dzin
Lhapal, who catches wild beasts by their neck,
ja tar khar ding nanam yeshe
Nanam Yeshe, who flies like a bird through the sky,
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

palgyi wang chuk purpa deng gum
Palkyi Wangchuk, who liberates others by merely raising his phurba,
mi jé zung tob denma tsé mang
Denma Tsemang, with unforgetting memory,
kawa pal tsek shyen sem kün khyen
Kawa Paltsek, who reads the minds of others,
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

chuwo gyen dok shüpu pal seng
Shüpu Palseng, who reverses the flow of rivers,
gyalwé lodrö ro lang ser gyur
Gyalwe Lodrö, who transforms corpses into gold,
namkha ja dzin khyeu chung lo tsa
Khye'u Chung Lotsā, who catches birds in the sky,
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

drenpa namkha yak gö ngön khuk
Drenpa Namkha, who summons wild yaks,
nya tar chur gyuk otren wang chuk
Otren Wangchuk, who swims like a fish,
mar tok rinchen pa wang zé söl
Matok Rinchen, who eats rocks,
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

drakrir tokmé palgyi dorje
Palkyi Dorje, who passes through mountains unhindered,
könchok jungné tokchen da pen
Könchok Jungne, who shoots lightning like an arrow,
kyiltrung khar ché gyalwa chang chub
Gyalwa Changchub, who sits cross-legged in the sky,
khyö la soldep chin gyi lop shik
To you we pray: please grant your blessings!

gongpa ngön gyur orgyen jé zung
You, who actualized Orgyen's wisdom and are embraced by him,
tuk sé mi jé bang rik nyer nga
Heart-disciples—the king and the twenty-five subjects.
min drol deng tob nam la sol dep
To you who were matured, liberated and achieved certainty, we pray:
khyerang tabur chingyi lop shik
Please grant your blessings, so that we may become just like you!

tawa longchen yangpé dön tok
Your view is the realization of the infinite vast expanse,
gompa trindral nyima tar sal
Your meditation is clear like the sun unobstructed by clouds,
khyö la soldep duksa di ru
To this place, where we pray to you,
nyurwa nyi du chin gyi lop shik
Please deliver your blessings swiftly!

chöpa tar chin drubpé tak tön
You perfected conduct and reveal signs of accomplishment
drebu kunzang gopang topbpar
To attain the level of Samantabhadra.
dak dang dro kun solwa dep so
I and all sentient beings pray:
data nyi du chin gyi lop shik
At this very instant, may you grant your blessings!

This was composed by Changdak Wangpo.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2016. (Translated by Stefan Mang, and revised by Lowell Cook,
Han Kop and Adam Pearcey.)
↑ “dbang dus” here simply means when, rather than “at the time of initiation”, with “dbang”
seemingly adding emphasis. (Oral clarification provided by a khenpo from Shechen).↑ The syllable
of Guru Rinpoche's unchanging mind here is also Hūṃ.↑ Once, when Guru Rinpoche was
residing in the area of Samyé, an avalanche came down from a cliff, threatening to destroy
the whole valley. While the stones were falling, Guru Rinpoche uttered "Hūṃ", and thereby
reversed the avalanche, causing all the stones to return to where they came from. Guru Rinpoche
then blessed the cliff with the syllable Hūṃ. To this day, a Hūṃ syllable is clearly
visible in the cliff where the avalanche began. (Oral clarification from Kyabje Khenpo).↑
That is Drekpa Kundul, chief figure in the maṇḍala of Jikten Chötö.↑ Chief figure in the
maṇḍala of Möpa Drakngak.↑ i.e., Chemchok Heruka