Words to Delight the Sovereigns of the Dharma
A Prayer of Aspiration for the Flourishing and Spread of the Ancient Translation Tradition
by Jamgön Mipham Rinpoche

During this final era at the end of time, whenever you can invoke the gurus, devas and ḍākinīs
and then wish, even just once, “May the jewel-like heart essence of the buddhas’ teachings
flourish and spread!” you will accrue merit that is beyond all measure. Not only that,
but you will naturally be fulfilling the aspirations of the bodhisattvas, and so in every
one of your lives you will encounter the Buddhadharma and especially its quintessence, the
most profound vehicle of all. Then, by holding, safeguarding and spreading these teachings,
you will quickly approach the wisdom of omniscience. This is why fortunate men and women
ought to recite this aspiration prayer as often as possible, and particularly on the occasion
of great gatherings of practitioners.

Invoking the Three Jewels and Three Roots
namo, chok chü dewar shekpa sé dangché
Homage to you, sugatas in every direction, along with all your heirs,
khyepar nyammé shakyé gyalpo dang
And especially to you, the one and only King of the Śākyas,
gyalsé gyé dang neten pakpé tsok
With the Eight Great Bodhisattvas and the exalted assembly of arhats.
khyentsé daknyi chok nam gong su sol
Sublime embodiments all of wisdom and compassion: turn your loving gaze toward us!

pendé jungné tenpa rinpoche
This precious teaching, source of all benefit, happiness and bliss,
tön dang sempa pakpa chok nam kyi
Is the truth for which our teacher, Lord Buddha, and all the supreme bodhisattvas
yangyang kawé tsal shying nakpé dön
Searched and strove, again and again, through hardship of every kind:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
So may this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

khen lob chögyal trulpé lo pen dang
Khenpo Śāntarakṣita, great master Padmasambhava, Dharma king Tri Songdetsen, incarnate translators
and paṇḍitas,
kater rigdzin gyüpa yidam lha
Vidyādharas who hold kama and terma lineages, yidam deities,
magön za dor gyü sum drekpé tsok
Ekajaṭī, Mahākāla, Za Rāhula, Dorje Lekpa and the proud protectors, male, female and diverse:
ngagyur tsa sum lhatsok gong su sol
All of you sources of blessing, attainment and activity in the Early Translations, turn your
minds toward us!

tubten do dang ngak kyi tsul tadak
You were the ones who, with all of your love and care,
gangchen jong su tsewé drang gyurpa
Brought the Buddha’s teaching and its countless Dharma systems of sūtra and tantra to the Land
of Snows.
ché cher pelwé dorjé dam gong né
So now remember your vajra promise to make them grow from strength to strength,
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
And let this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

The Greatness of the Translators & Scholars
chok dü gyalwé ku sung tuk dorjé
The vajra body, speech and mind of buddhas throughout all of space and time,
rik sum sempé gyutrul rolmo yi
Emanated as forms of Avalokiteśvara, Vajrapāṇi, and Mañjuśrī, whose magical display
gangchen pendé nyima salwar dzé
Caused a sun of happiness to fill the Land of Snows with light.
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
This teaching of the lotus-born buddha: may it flourish and spread!

gyal dang gyalsé pakpa chenpö tsok
Then buddhas and sublime great bodhisattvas chose
samshyin trulpé dögar nyer zung né
To emanate and be born there as lotsawas and scholars,
drimé gyalten norbü gyaltsen dreng
To raise high the victory-banner with its jewel, the untarnished teachings of Buddha:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
So may this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

tünmong tünmin shyung kün rangwang gi
It was they alone who translated, without error, the common sciences and all the extraordinary
scriptures,
manor gyur shyü ten la pabpa yi
They who checked them and finalized them,
gangjong nangwé go chen tokmar ché
So for the first time a great door was flung open, flooding the Land of Snows with the light
of Dharma.
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

The Greatness of the Translations: Buddha’s Words and the Commentaries
kalzang duljé do dang ngak kyi tsul
Fortunate disciples taking up the practice of
nyam su len la shyen dring mijokpar
The sūtras and tantras have no need to look elsewhere,
ka dang gongpa drelwé shyung kün dzok
For within the Buddha’s words and the commentaries on his vision, everything is complete.
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
These teachings of the lotus-born buddha: may they flourish and spread!

Kama and Terma, Sūtra and Mantra
den sung ka yi gyatso chenpo la
The truth the Buddha taught—the kama transmission is vast and immeasurable,
zabmö chö ter norbü ngönpar dzé
Its full beauty brought out by the jewels of the profound termas
do dang ngak kyi lam zang zung du drel
To form a sublime path that unites both sūtra and mantra.
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

View and Conduct
mejung zahor khenpö chöpa dang
The action of Śāntarakṣita, exquisite scholar of Zahor,
tsungmé palden lu yi tawa nyi
And the view of the unequalled, glorious Nāgārjuna
zung drel gyüpé ka sol chakgyé tab
Integrated as one, seal the tradition of this lineage:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

The Greatness of the Profound Essence: the Vast Tantras
zabmö nanggyü dé sum gongpé chü
The quintessence of the three profound inner tantras lies in
tünmin mengak sangwé lamchok né
The uncommon pith instructions; their supreme and secret path leads
jalü chökur shekpé ngotsar bar
To the radiant wonder of entering the dharmakāya in a body of rainbow light:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

The Profound Sādhanas
rabjam shyitrö khyabdak drubdé gyé
The eight sādhanas of the infinite peaceful and wrathful deities
kabab rigdzin sosö gong chü dang
Were transmitted to each of the eight vidyādharas. The essence of their realization
kündü pemé kasol chik tu khyil
And Padmasambhava’s tradition which combines them all are woven into one
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
In this teaching of the lotus-born buddha: may it flourish and spread!

The Greatness of the Purity of the Teachings: their Words
gyu dang drebu sang ngak tekpa ché
The great causal vehicle and resultant secret mantra vehicle,
tsang la manor rigdzin gyüpé lung
Complete and unmistaken, with the original words of the vidyādhara lineage masters
daki shyal gyi drö lang tolewa
And the hot breath of the ḍākinīs, straight from their lips —
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
Such is the teaching of the lotus-born Buddha: may it flourish and spread!

Their Meaning
dorjé chang gi gongdön dütsi chü
Vajradhara’s wisdom mind, its quintessential nectar,
khedrub jewé shyal né nyen du gyü
Is transmitted from mouth to ear by millions of learned and realized beings,
tokgé ngenpé rang zö malepar
Untainted by the inventions of wrong-headed intellectuals:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Their Uniqueness
ser shying norbü trepé yön gyi kyang
Even by offering continents made of gold, covered with jewels,
miguk ying kyi khandrö tuk dzö chö
Teachings from the space ḍākinīs’ wisdom mind treasury can never be acquired,
tsewé jejuk kalpa khonar tram
For they are bestowed only out of love, and to worthy, fortunate disciples:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

The Greatness of Dzogpachenpo: Establishing the Ground
ngowo kané dakpé yeshe la
In the wisdom of the essence, primordially pure,
rangshyin lhün gyi drubpé dang sharwé
The radiance of its nature spontaneously shines out.
lün gom sem lé depé dzokpa ché
So Great Perfection is utterly beyond the conceptual minds of dull meditators:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Practising the Path
yömé chokrer shyenpé mikté shyik
Where rigid concepts clinging to one side or another, existence or non-existence, naturally
collapse,
tardzin tawé dzintang drung né chung
And habitual grasping to extreme views is uprooted,
shyi lam drebu nangtong zung du juk
Ground, Path and Fruition are the union of appearance and emptiness:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Resolving the Fruition
dü sum gyalwé gongpa tartuk dön
The final meaning of all buddhas’ realization, past, present and future,
zab shyi trödral ösal dümajé
“Profound, peace, natural simplicity, clear light, uncompounded”,
riktong mishik dorjé drubpé ta
Is the indestructible vajra viewpoint of inseparable awareness and emptiness:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Practising and Upholding the Teachings of Transmission
mangdu töpa lung gi trin trik shing
Anyone who has studied many teachings can draw on a teeming cloud of scriptural sources,
parol gol jom rigpé lok treng bar
And so defeat opponents with a reasoning that scorches like bolts of lightning,
mengak né kyi dütsi nying la sim
While the nectar of the crucial points of the experiential pith-instructions seeps into their
hearts:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Practising and Upholding the Teachings of Realization
mejung atiyogé seng lam né
By following this swift and secret path, the sublime Atiyoga,
malü gyalwa kün gyi yeshe ku
The wisdom body of all of the buddhas,
khyabdak jampal dorjer rab drubpa
The universal lord, Mañjuśrī the Indestructible, is actually and perfectly realized:
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Spreading the Dharma of Transmission
yangdak tsema sum gyi ngaro yi
The lion’s roar, the three authentic teachings of scripture, reasoning and pith instruction,
ta men ridak tsok nam trakdzepa
Strikes terror among all other animals, the holders of lesser views.
tek chok sengé drayang sa sum khyab
Just like the call of the lion, so too may the sound of Atiyoga, the supreme vehicle, fill the
entire earth, above, below and in between,
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
And this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

Spreading the Dharma of Realization
gyalten yongsu dzokpé gö zang tser
The Buddha’s teachings, so complete, are like the folds of exquisite silk in a banner of victory,
ösal dorjé nyingpö tok dzepa
And the Clear Light Vajra Essence of Dzogpachenpo, akin to the beautiful crowning jewel at its
tip.
chok lé nampar gyalwé gyaltsen to
So raise this all-conquering banner high into the sky
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
And let this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread for ages to come!

How We Will Hold the Teaching
dak sok deng né drowa jisi du
From this day on, and as long as living beings remain,
ten dang tenpé nyingpo yongdzokpa
I and others will hold, protect and spread the teachings of Buddha in their entirety, and especially
their Heart Essence,
khakhyab shying du dzin kyong pelwa yi
In buddha realms reaching through the whole of space,
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
And so let us cause this teaching of the lotus-born buddha to flourish and to spread!

How Others will Hold the Teachings
dorna khé tsün drubpé namtar gyi
Finally, by emulating the learned, disciplined and realized practitioners,
gyalten pelwé trinlé khakhyabpé
Let true holders of the teachings spread the Buddhadharma, and their enlightening actions stretch
throughout the universe.
tendzin dampé sateng yong gang né
Let them appear everywhere on Earth, and thereby
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
May this teaching of the lotus-born buddha flourish and spread!

palden lamé kutsé rabten ching
Let the lives of the glorious masters be forever secure and firm,
tenpé jindak ngatang darwa yi
Let the prosperity, power and standing of the sponsors of the teachings grow,
chösi minub norbü gyaltsen dreng
Let the resources of the Dharma and of our world never wane, and may this jewelled victory banner
fly forever,
tsokyé gyalwé tenpa gyé gyur chik
So the teaching of the lotus-born buddha spreads far and wide, and remains for ages to come!

The embodiment of all the victorious buddhas is the awe-inspiring enlightened Lotus-born Guru,
who has transcended death and was born on the Lake Dhanakośa. The teaching of this second
buddha, renowned as ‘the Early Translation Tradition of the Ancient Ones, the Nyingmapas’,
represents the source of the complete teachings of the Buddha and, being a unique Dharma
with copious extraordinary and profound crucial points, and a View and Meditation that
are completely pure, it constitutes an exquisite path, devoid of any error, that delights
the buddhas. Being fully aware of this, just as when the wish-fulfilling jewel, once polished
and set atop the victory banner, grants everyone’s wishes, so beings with fortunate karma
should personally take responsibility for making certain that these teachings flourish
and spread in all directions, through teaching, through defending them in debate and through
written composition, in a great burst of enlightened endeavour. As an auspicious tendrel
to bring about this wish by means of an aspiration prayer, one with the very purest intentions
regarding the ancient Nyingma teachings, Mipham Jamyang Namgyal Gyatso, wrote down
just whatever came into his mind in the midday session, when the place, time, and so on were
all exceptionally auspicious. May goodness abound!

| © Rigpa Translations, 2016. Translated with reference to Shechen Gyaltsab Pema Namgyal’s commentary
‘Banner of Victory in Every Direction’, with precious clarifications by Zenkar Rinpoche.
First published on Lotsawa House, with permission, 2018.